QIR specification update 1 (#83)
microsoft/qsharp-language: Specifications/QIR/Data-Types.md

# Data Type Representation

> QIR defines an LLVM representations for a variety of classical and quantum data types that may be used as part of a compiled quantum program. For more information about classical memory management including reference and alias counting, see [here](Classical-Runtime.md#memory-management).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
QIR defines LLVM representations for a variety of classical and quantum data types that may be used as part of a compiled quantum program. For more information about classical memory management including reference and alias counting, see [here](Classical-Runtime.md#memory-management).
```

## Opaque Types

Representing certain types as pointers to opaque LLVM structure types allows each target to provide a structure definition appropriate for that target.

> In addition to arrays and callable values, the type `%Qubit*` used to represent qubits, and the type `%Result*` representing measurement results, are both opaque within QIR. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to arrays and callable values, the types `%Qubit*` that represents qubits and `%Result*` that represents measurement results are both opaque within QIR. 
```

| __quantum__rt__range_to_string   | `%String*(%Range)`   | Returns a string representation of the range. |
| __quantum__rt__bigint_to_string  | `%String*(%BigInt*)` | Returns a string representation of the big integer. |

## Big Integers

> 

Author: The spec is not primarily meant to reflect what we implement, but is meant as a shared convention for different implementers. What is and isn't implemented should hence be documented as part of our compiler and runtime rather than on the spec here.

## Tuples and User-Defined Types

Tuple data, including values of user-defined types, is represented as the corresponding LLVM structure type.
For instance, a tuple containing two integers, `(Int, Int)`, would be represented in LLVM as `type {i64, i64}`.

When [invoking callable values](Callables.md#invoking-a-callable-value) using the `__quantum__rt__callable_invoke` runtime function, 
tuples are passed as a pointer to an opaque LLVM structure, `%Tuple`. The pointer is expected to point to the contained data such that it can be cast to the correct data structures by the
receiving code.
This permits the definition of runtime functions that are common for all tuples, such as the functions listed below.

Many languages provide immutable tuples, along with operators that allow a modified copy of an existing tuple to be created.
QIR supports this by requiring the runtime to track and be able to access the following given a `%Tuple*`:
- The size of the tuple in bytes
- The alias count indicating how many handles to the tuple exist in the source code

> The language specific compiler is responsible for injecting calls to increase and decrease the alias count as needed, as well as to accurately reflect when references to the LLVM structure representing a tuple are created and removed. 

Author: Yes, that is correct. However, to avoid the impression that QIR is in any way specific to Q# - which it is explicitly not meant to be - I'd rather avoid mention Q# over any other language that may choose to use this as their IR.

| __quantum__rt__array_concatenate | `%Array*(%Array*, %Array*)`          | Returns a new array which is the concatenation of the two passed-in arrays. |
| __quantum__rt__array_slice_1d       | `%Array*(%Array*, %Range, i1)`      | Creates and returns an array that is a slice of an existing 1-dimensional array. The slice may be accessing the same memory as the given array unless its alias count is larger than 0 or the last argument is `true`. The `%Range` specifies the indices that should be the elements of the returned array. The reference count of the elements remains unchanged. |
| __quantum__rt__array_get_size_1d  | `i64(%Array*)`                  | Returns the length of a 1-dimensional array. |
| __quantum__rt__array_get_element_ptr_1d | `i8*(%Array*, i64)`           | Returns a pointer to the element of the array at the zero-based index given by the `i64`. |
| __quantum__rt__array_update_reference_count   | `void(%Array*, i32)` | Adds the given integer value to the reference count for the array. Deallocates the array if the reference count becomes 0. The behavior is undefined if the reference count becomes negative. |

> | __quantum__rt__array_update_alias_count | `void(%Array*, i32)` | Adds the given integer value to the alias count for the array. Fails if either count becomes negative. |

Reviewer 2: (For negative ref count the _behavior is undefined_. But for negative alias count - _fail_)
Just out of curiosity...
My understanding is that if the count becomes negative then it means an internal bug for both cases - ref count and alias count. Then why the behavior is different (if the count becomes negative)? Why not both fail or both undefined behavior?

Author: I'd prefer to have both fail properly - undefined behavior is always harder to debug - but given that the change decreasing the ref count below zero may be applied to something that is already deallocated, it doesn't quite come for free to do so. Being required to properly fail I believe may have performance implications and would require additional work in the runtime; if you see any clever solutions for avoiding that, I am all ears. :)

Reviewer 2: Thank you, Bettina. I really wasn't taking into account that the attempt to decrease the ref count down to a negative value can be accessing the _already deallocated_ instance. And such an access (even the _read_ of a ref count of the deallocated instance) already causes the _undefined behavior_ (e.g. the compiler can fully optimize out any such access if the compiler knows for sure that the instance is already deallocated).
